# Array

Array is a data structure that O(1) when search, O(n) when insert.

## Basic syntax

### create/del a list

```python
l = []
l = list()

del l
```

### operations

```python
## slice
l[beg:end:step]   # when step <0, beg need to > end.

# inplace operations, returns None!!
l.append()
l.extend()   # input is sequence, so "a" is ok, but 3 is not.
l.reverse()  # l[::-1], return None
l.pop() # delete the last number

### bisect
# for a orderred list l, we can use py3 built-in binary select function.
i = bisect_left(l,x) # the first index >= x
j = bisect_right(l,x) # the first index > x
# eg1, l=[1,5,9], x=7 -> i=j=2
# eg1.1, l=[1,5,9], x=10 -> i=j=3
## -> x not in l, returns appropriate insert position
# eg2, l=[1,5,9], x=9 -> i=2, j=3
# eg3, l=[1,5,5,9], x=5 -> i=1,j=3
bisect_left(l,x,begin,end,key = lambda x: x[1]) # [begin, end)
```

## Problems

### Binary Search

> [704. Binary Search](https://leetcode.com/problems/binary-search/description/) sorted **unique** numbers

#### Details need to remember:

- **Initializing boundary** needs to cover all elements: `l=0, r=length-1`

- **Calculating mid** needs to consider integer overflow

  ```python
  mid = (l+r)//2  # very easy to overflow
  mid = l + (r-l)//2  # better, but still possible
  mid = (l+r) >> 1  # the best
  ```

- **Pick left `mid` or right `mid`** (according to the different if...else condition)

  ```python
  mid = (l+r) >> 1  # left mid
  mid = (l+r+1) >> 1  # right mid
  ```

  it depends on how you write the ```if ... else```.

  Just imagine there are only 2 elements left, and the procedure falls into the 'else block'. The wrong mid will result in an infinite loop because neither `l` nor `r` makes a move. You need to make sure that each move shrinks the `r-l`.

  **left mid with > condition(target falls into right half)**

  ```python
  mid = (l+r) >> 1
  
  if target > nums[mid]:
      l = mid + 1  # mid is not the answer
  else:
      r = mid  # mid might be the answer
  ```

  **after exit:** `l==r` and returns the index that its value >= the target -> except for target lying in the right of the list.

  Left mid uses `l` to get close to the target(`l=mid+1`). If the target doesn't exist in the list, the pointers both stop at the first number bigger than it.

  0 1 2 3 4 5, target: 2.5, `l==r==3`; target: 6, `l==r==5`

  **right mid with < condition(target falls into left half)**

  ```python
  mid = (l+r+1) >> 1
  
  if target < nums[mid]:
      r = mid - 1
  else:
      l = mid
  ```

  **after exit:** `l==r` and returns the index that its value <= the target -> except for target lying in the left of the list.

  Right mid uses `r` to get close to the target(`r=mid-1`). If the target doesn't exist in the list, the pointers both stop at the last number smaller than it.

  0 1 2 3 4 5, target: 2.5, `l==r==2`; target: -1, `l==r==0`

- **While loop**

  ```python
  while(l<r):
      ...
  return l if nums[l]==target else -1
  ```

  **after exit:** the list is empty -> `l > r`; non-empty -> `l==r`

> [34. First and last index](https://leetcode.com/problems/find-first-and-last-position-of-element-in-sorted-array/) sorted **nonunique** numbers

When the numbers are non-unique, the exit condition changes a little:

​	0 1 2 3 3 3 4 , target: 3

- **left mid**: when hit the target number, `r` will keep moving left until meets `l`

  **exit condition:** if target in the list, `l==r==the first target num index`

- **right mid:** when hit the target number, `l` will keep moving right until meets `r`

  **exit condition:** if target in the list,`l==r==the last target num index`

> [274. H-Index](https://leetcode.com/problems/h-index/)

- Solution 1: sort reversely then count, $O(nlogn), O(n)$

- Solution 2: construct hash map to record the number of papers that cited i times.

- Solution 3: Binary search.

  - As the h-index ranges from 0 to n. We can do the binary search to find the correct h-index.

  - left mid or right mid? 

    - When we compute a mid, we assume it is the current h-index. Then we iterate citations to count the number of papers that cited >= mid times. 

    - When the cnt >= mid, the final h-index could > mid and could also = mid. 

    - When the cnt < mid, the final h-index is definitely < mid.

    - So the if else loop should be:

      ```python
      if cnt < mid:
          r = mid - 1
      else:
          l = mid
      ```

      That is a right mid formula. So `mid = (l+r+1)>>1`

### Two pointers

In summary, two pointers method is used for:

1. Cutting down a `'for loop'`, from $O(n^2)$ to $O(n)$.
2. Needing one pointer as index, another to process elements -> same direction
3. Convenient to process together of head and end -> opposite direction

Tips:

1. We can process from right to the left (especially when having vacancies in the right part of the array). -> finishing the task in one iteration.

> [27. Remove Element](https://leetcode.com/problems/remove-element/description/)

- Two pointers walk in the **same direction**: the slow one to keep the result list, the fast one to iterate the list.
- Two pointers walk in the **opposite direction**: left for searching in sequence, right for picking the element to replace.

> [238. Product of Array Except Self](https://leetcode.com/problems/product-of-array-except-self/)

We can record the product of the prefix and suffix in the ans[], and calculate the ans in the same time.

- We use l, r pointers walking in the opposite direction. 
  - Fill ans with 1.
  - When they haven't meet, the ans[l] means the product of prefix 0~l-1; ans[r] means the product of suffix r+1~n-1.
  - When they meet and surpass each other, the ans[l] is not 1 anymore. It means the product of suffix l+1~n-1. We can get the correct ans by multiplying it with the currently accumulated product of prefix. Likewise, ans[r] is updated in the same way.

> [11. Container With Most Water](https://leetcode.com/problems/container-with-most-water/)

A bit like problem 84. In this problem, we can use two pointers l, r to represent the left and right boundary. When shrink the boundary, it is always better to move the shorter one.

> [42. Trapping Rain Water](https://leetcode.com/problems/trapping-rain-water/)

Also, we set left and right pointers. In the mean time, we keep the lmax, rmax to record the current max height of left part and right part during moving.

We judge the shorter one between lmax and rmax, because the longer one can definitely help trap the water. Assume currently the shorter one is lmax, then the trapped water on the l index should be `lmax-h[l]`.

### Sliding Window

> [209. minimum size subarray sum](https://leetcode.com/problems/minimum-size-subarray-sum/)

- l and r move in the **same direction **(start at the same place).
- while r explore for a bigger sum, l moves to shrink the window size.

### Rotate Array

> [189. Rotate Array](https://leetcode.com/problems/rotate-array/)

- Solution 1: construct an additional list.
- Solution 2: reverse the array from 0 to n. Then reverse nums[:k] and nums[k:].
- Solution 3: use a temp variable to record the next replaced number. Replacing the numbers with a step size of k and in a circular manner.

### Moore Voting Algorithm(find majority)

> [169. Majority Element](https://leetcode.com/problems/majority-element/)

If there is a majority element in an array, it will always remain in the lead, even after encountering other elements.

We pick a temporary majority (`candidate`) first. Each time we meet the same candidate, we increase the count by 1. Else we decrease by 1. Once the count reach to 0, we assign the current num as the new candidate.

```python
candidate, count = 0, 0
for num in nums:
    if count == 0:
        candidate = num
        count += 1 if num == candidate else -1
return candidate
```



## Sort algorithm

### Quick sort -> $O(nlogn)$

An recursive method with partitioning to two sub-arrays each time. Partition as follows:

1. pick a pivot -> `random index and swap it to a[0]`

2. two pointers l and r moving in the oppose direction, making the left part smaller than pivot and the right part bigger.

3. swap a[l] and a[r], return the index of where it is partitioned.

**Attention:**

- If a is sorted, index == l will result in $O(n^2)$, so random index is needed.
- If there are many repeated nums, line 7-8 can not include equal. If so, the partitioned sub-arrays are always one longer than another.

```python
def quicksort(a,l,r):
    if l >= r: return
    index = random.randint(l,r)  # [l,r]
    pivot = a[index]
    i, j = l, r
    while i <= j:   # Attention
        while a[j] > pivot: j -= 1   # can not include equal.
        while a[i] < pivot: i += 1   # can not include equal.
        if i > j: break              # Attention
        a[i], a[j] = a[j], a[i]
        j -= 1    # prevent j stuck at the pivot num.
        i += 1    # prevent i stuck at the pivot num.
    quicksort(a,l,i-1)
    quicksort(a,i,r)
```



